473 nextcloud integration documentation (#525)
ElektraInitiative/PermaplanT: doc/research/nextcloud_integration.md

> collaborative medium and not just a read-only medium."
> [wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WebDAV)

### Access Files

Nextcloud implements the webDAV protocol. This means that we can access files in Nextcloud with any webdav client.
There are popular file managers like 'Konqueror' from the KDE team and 'GNOME Files' from the GNOME team which implement the webDAV protocol.
However webDAV is not exclusive to file managers. 

> In PermaplanT we use a javascript library named [webdav](https://github.com/perry-mitchell/webdav-client) to access files in Nextcloud. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In PermaplanT we use a Javascript library named [webdav](https://github.com/perry-mitchell/webdav-client) to access files in Nextcloud. 
```

For files available on public shares we send the requests directly with axios.

Public shares are directories where a public link is created.

> The last part of the link is the share token. E.g. For the URL 'https://cloud.permaplant.net/s/2arzyJZYj2oNnHX' the share token is '2arzyJZYj2oNnHX'.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The last part of the link is the share token.
E.g. for the URL 'https://cloud.permaplant.net/s/2arzyJZYj2oNnHX' the share token is '2arzyJZYj2oNnHX'.
```

This share token can be used as username and password to access files from the directory.
Files at the top level as well as files in subdirectories can be accessed using the share token.
E.g. when following directory structure is given:
```bash
nextcloud_root_dir
├── Documents
│   └── secret-doc.txt
├── Photos
└── Public
    ├── Icons
    │   ├── add.svg
    │   └── delete.svg
    ├── Maps
    │   └── map.json
    └── Pictures
        └── tree.png
```
and the directory 'Public' is accessed with the share token. 
All files ('add.svg', 'delete.svg', 'map.json', 'tree.png') in all subdirectories ('Icons', 'Maps', 'Pictures') of 'Public' can be accessed.
The path for fetching a file starts at the shared directory, in this case 'Public'.
To access the file 'add.svg' following URI is used: 'https://cloud.permaplant.net/public.php/webdav/Icons/add.svg'.
The first part: 'https://cloud.permaplant.net/' is the scheme and host for our Nextcloud instance.

> The next part '/public.php/webdav/' is the endpoint used to access files from the public share directory specified by the share token.

Reviewer: IMHO to format paths as code is prettier:

```suggestion
The next part `/public.php/webdav/` is the endpoint used to access files from the public share directory specified by the share token.
```

The share token is given as username and password in the request.
The last part 'Icons/add.svg' is the path to the requested file starting from the public share directory.

> When we want to fetch 'add.svg' following request is used:

Reviewer: keep using active voice

```suggestion
When we want to fetch `add.svg`, we use the following request:
```

```bash
curl -X GET -O -u 2arzyJZYj2oNnHX:2arzyJZYj2oNnHX https://cloud.permaplant.net/public.php/webdav/Icons/add.svg
```

In PermaplanT we use the public shares for data which should be accessible by unauthenticated users.
E.g. images on the landing page or icons for plants.

To fetch resources from directories which are not available for the public some form of authentication has to be used.
The easiest way to authenticate with the Nextcloud instance is to use the username and password in the request. This is called basic authentication.
However, this is not secure when the requests are sent from the browser as this information can be easily sniffed.

> So we decided to use 'OpenID Connect' for authentication. Details on why we decided to use 'OpenID Connect' can be found in the [decision document]('https://github.com/ElektraInitiative/PermaplanT/blob/master/doc/decisions/auth.md').

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So we decided to use 'OpenID Connect' for authentication.
Details on why we decided to use 'OpenID Connect' can be found in the [decision document]('https://github.com/ElektraInitiative/PermaplanT/blob/master/doc/decisions/auth.md').
```

All we need to know here is that requests from authenticated users are populated with the access token in the Authorization header.

Now we can make requests against the '/remote.php/webdav' endpoint.
This endpoint enables us to fetch files starting from the root directory of the logged in user.
Given the previously defined directory structure we can now access the file 'secret-doc.txt' with the following URI: 'https://cloud.permaplant.net/remote.php/webdav/Documents/secret-doc.txt'

### Directory Structure

In the PermaplanT Nextcloud instance we have following directory structure for each user:
```bash
PermaplanT/
└── Maps
    ├── map_01
    │   ├── BaseLayer
    │   │   └── base_layer_image.png
    │   └── PhotoLayer
    │       ├── photo1.jpg
    │       └── photo2.jpg
    └── map_02
        ├── BaseLayer
        │   └── base_layer_image.png
        └── PhotoLayer
            ├── photo1.jpg
            └── photo2.jpg
```

> When a map is shared between different users the directory also has to be shared and placed within this structure.

Reviewer: It is unclear to me what "placed within this structure" means, please elaborate. I think there should be only one "map_01" folder (by the creator of the map) and people with write access get write access to that folder.

Author: E.g. If you add me to the shares of a directory of yours (wherever it is in your directory hierarchy), this directory will pop up at my root directory.

Reviewer: Ahh, please write this also in the document. I didn't understand because with "sharing map" I didn't think of sharing files in Nextcloud.

I don't know if it helps, but the directory where shares are created can be configured in Settings/Einstellungen -> Sharing/Teilen -> Standardordner für akzeptierte Freigaben wählen

I usually use something like `/Shared/Incoming` to not have a cluttered root directory. But if we move it immediately, it shouldn't matter?

Author: The default directory could be useful but I guess moving it to ensure that it is there is the way to go :)

Therefore the map directories must have a globally unique name.

> The name of each map directory is the same as the name of the map in the PermaplanT database. This is possible because the name in the database is unique.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The name of each map directory is the same as the name of the map in the PermaplanT database.
This is possible because the name in the database is unique.
```

All public directories can be placed anywhere as they are identified by the public share token.
They are not visible to all of the users in Nextcloud, so they are not included in the directory structure above.

### Sharing a Map

When we want to add additional members to our PermaplanT map we also have to share the Nextcloud resources with them.
First we need to create a circle.
This can be achieved by following API call:
```json
"method": "POST",
"headers": [
  "OCS-APIRequest": true,
  "Content-Type": "application/json"
],
"body": {
  "name": "map_01",
  "personal": false,
  "local": false
},
"scheme":	"https",
"host": "cloud.permaplant.net",
"filename": "/ocs/v2.php/apps/circles/circles"
```
The name of the circle is the same as the name of the map.

> Unfortunately the circle API is not documented. The implementation of the API can be found on the corresponding [github repository](https://github.com/nextcloud/circles/blob/22238597fb9045e748119247fceaac7321f0a31e/appinfo/routes.php).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unfortunately the circle API is not documented.
The implementation of the API can be found on the corresponding [github repository](https://github.com/nextcloud/circles/blob/22238597fb9045e748119247fceaac7321f0a31e/appinfo/routes.php).
```

Now the circle has to be added to the shares for the map directory.
This can be done with the share API which is documented [here](https://docs.nextcloud.com/server/latest/developer_manual/client_apis/OCS/ocs-share-api.html).
Following API call can be used:
```
"method": "post",
"headers": [
  "ocs-apirequest": true
],
"body": {
  "path": "PermaplanT/Maps/map_01",
  "shareType": 7,
  "shareWith": "<circleId>"
},
"scheme":	"https",
"host": "cloud.permaplant.net",
"filename": "/ocs/v2.php/apps/files_sharing/api/v1"
```

> ### Components

Reviewer: Probably better to document them directly in Storybook, isn't it?

```suggestion
### React Components
```

Author: Yes, they should be in Storybook as well.

There are a number of components which help with interacting with Nextcloud files.

#### Image Components

There are four components that handle fetching and displaying images from Nextcloud.

- NextcloudImage: This component fetches an image from the user directory in Nextcloud and renders it.

> - PublicNextcloudImage: This component fetches and renders an image which is available on a public share.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- PublicNextcloudImage: This component fetches and renders an image from a public share.
```

- NextcloudKonvaImage: This component fetches an image from the user directory in Nextcloud and creates a shape for Konva (Canvas library used in PermplanT).
- PublicNextcloudKonvaImage: This component fetches an image from the Nextcloud public share and creates a shape for Konva.

#### File Selection

Component which shows the content of a Nextcloud directory and lets the user choose a file.

Will be implemented in #475.

### Further Related Resources

- https://docs.nextcloud.com/server/latest/developer_manual/client_apis/WebDAV/comments.html
- https://docs.oracle.com/cd/E12839_01/portal.1111/e10235/webdav007.htm#POUSR1607
- https://docs.nextcloud.com/server/25/user_manual/en/files/access_webdav.html#
- http://www.webdav.org/specs/rfc4918.html

## Limitations

> ### CORS (Cross-Origin Resource Sharing)
> > "CORS is an HTTP-header based mechanism that allows a server to indicate any origins (domain, scheme, or port) other than its own from which a browser should permit loading resources."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### CORS (Cross-Origin Resource Sharing)

> "CORS is an HTTP-header based mechanism that allows a server to indicate any origins (domain, scheme, or port) other than its own from which a browser should permit loading resources."
```

-- [Mozilla MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/CORS)

> Nextcloud offers no options to change the CORS configuration. This means that all requests coming from a different origin than the one Nextcloud is hosted on are blocked.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nextcloud offers no options to change the CORS configuration.
This means that all requests coming from a different origin than the one Nextcloud is hosted on are blocked.
```

> The PermaplanT production environment has following structure:
> - Frontend: "https://www.permaplant.net".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The PermaplanT production environment has following structure:

- Frontend: "https://www.permaplant.net".
```

- Backend: "https://www.permaplant.net/api"
- Nextcloud: "https://cloud.permaplant.net"
- Keycloak: "https://auth.permaplant.net/realms/PermaplanT"

> This means the origin for Nextcloud differs from the origin of the PermaplanT frontend. Consequently CORS has to be configured to allow requests from the frontend origin otherwise the requests to Nextcloud are blocked by the browser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means the origin for Nextcloud differs from the origin of the PermaplanT frontend.
Consequently CORS has to be configured to allow requests from the frontend origin otherwise the requests to Nextcloud are blocked by the browser.
```
